---
{"type":"concept","tags":["concept","mythical"],"site":null,"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/3-concepts/shevirat-ha-kelim/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"dg-note-properties":{"type":"concept","tags":["concept","mythical"],"site":null}}
---

In [[3. Concepts/Luria's Safed Circle\|Lurianic]] Kabbalah, _kelim_ (כלים, singular _kli_) are the vessels [[1. Surface Texts/On Creation\|formed]] from the _[[3. Concepts/reshimu\|reshimu]]_ (the trace of divine light left in the vacated space after _[[3. Concepts/tsimtsum\|tsimtsum]]_). They were created to contain the divine light (_or_) that re-entered the void through the _qaw_ (the line of controlled divine emanation).

The vessels, which were created of the aspect of divinity's capacity for finitude, were structurally weak in the initial phase of _[[3. Concepts/tohu va vohu\|Tohu]]_ (chaos) because each existed as an isolated point without interconnection. When the divine light, which was of the aspect of infinitude, entered them, they could not bear its intensity and shattered. This is _shevirat ha-kelim_ — the breaking of the vessels. The shards of finitude (_kelipot_), which now held sparks of divine infinitude (_nitzotzot_), fell through the void. The fragments of infinitude trapped and obstructed within finitude cannot return to the divine unity without the work of [[1. Surface Texts/TIKKUN\|TIKKUN]]. As they are in a constant tension between striving and obstruction they gain a kind of false consciousness, mistaking the movement of the light within the shell for the vitality of the husk. This is what Lurianic thought calls the _sitra achra_ (the "other side"). It is not a separate power opposing God, but the divine which has become estranged from itself, its light diverted from itself and made to serve a shell.

As a result of this illusion of separation, the kelipot become actively malevolent, trying to draw more light into themselves. They tempt, seduce and disrupt, encouraging further breakage. The misdirection of human creative energy into the kelipot is what perpetuates the brokenness within [[3. Concepts/Olam\|Olam]]. This is because humans are God's partners in the creation of the world - we are the replication of divine structure. When we perform [[5. Citations/6. Papers/“Tikkun” Viewed from the Perspective of Systems PhilosophyPhilosophy Martin Zwick\|Tikkun]], we elevate the exiled sparks. When we direct our powers towards the _kelipot_, we perpetuate the estrangement of divinity from itself.

After the breaking of the vessels (_shevirat ha-kelim_, [[3. Concepts/Eyn Sof\|Eyn Sof]] repeats the process of emanation. In the second, rectified creation (_Olam ha-Tikkun_), the vessels are reconstituted as interlocking structures (_partzufim_), each containing the others and thus able to share the burden of divine light without shattering.