---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/3-concepts/tikkun-as-inhabiting-retroactive-not-yet/","tags":["unfinished","beta"],"dg-note-properties":{"type":"concept","tags":["unfinished","beta"],"site":null}}
---

To take from the lineage of agamben and make tikkun be the practise of inhabiting the retroactive not yet - to create within oneself messianic time and optimally to share it with others through creation. Because the process of emanation of the divine into the world functions through individuation, and the process of tikkun functions by bringing back together what was disparate, so it becomes a tension of self-sustenance which tends towards empowering others until each can join together like the sefirot. [[tikkun-ha-nefesh\|To understand Tikkun as the choice of what to be]] (tikkun ha nefesh) and therefore what to fold into the world. [[art-as-state-of-exception\|To consider art from the perspective of idolatry]], depicting what is sacred, and therefore profaning - making material - the divine. In this, one creates a kind of experiential state of exception, in which the person experiencing and the person creating the work exist in a moment of outside (the other person/s perception) having been folded into their inside through perception. The scream in Nahman also creates a state of exception, which articulates the paradox and answers it at the same time. Art, imo, should do the same: sometimes it highlights absurdity, its own debasement as commodity, the conditions it must acquiesce to in order to exist. Sometimes it weaves together opposing sensibilities (mona hatoum). In general what it does is create a monad/ state of exception. (If the monad transverses time, the state of exception is the experience of timelessness - and time is precisely that which one experiences when caught within the linearity. But the timelessness is the eschaton, the experience of potential. Therefore, art is that tiny thing shifted, the perfected world in which everything is mostly the same but small things adjusted. That is not because much more does not need to change, but because we are only capable of small change, and when it truly manages to create that state of exception it merely shows that more is possible: it isn’t the promise of a correct world, but the experience of agency in opening space for it — shooting at the clocks Benjamin)