---
{"type":"citation","author":"Elliot R. Wolfson","title":"Retroactive Not Yet: Linear Circularity and Kabbalistic Temporality, Chapter 2 of Time and Eternity in Jewish Mysticism: That Which is Before and That Which is After","pages":"48, 49","tags":["time","citation"],"editors":"Brian Ogren","publisher":"Brill","site":null,"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/2-main-theoretical-pillars/wolfson-reshima-time/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"dg-note-properties":{"type":"citation","author":"Elliot R. Wolfson","title":"Retroactive Not Yet: Linear Circularity and Kabbalistic Temporality, Chapter 2 of Time and Eternity in Jewish Mysticism: That Which is Before and That Which is After","pages":"48, 49","tags":["time","citation"],"editors":"Brian Ogren","publisher":"Brill","site":null}}
---

Time is  accorded the significance of the trace that is the genuine novelty of repetition.  To grasp this paradox, which is the secret of time, we must distinguish two  connotations implied in the word _reshimu_. An imprint (_roshem_), as it is ordinarily construed, is a mark of what is no longer ready at hand, a sign that evokes the absent presence of something that is presently absent. In Luzzatto’s image, the trace is what remains from the writing after the letters have been removed. Likewise, with respect to the divine, the trace is an impression that endures in the place of the void after the light of the infinite has been withdrawn. However, the word _reshimu_ is also related to the notion of inscription (_reshimah_), which is a portent that previews what is hidden from sight.  One must bear in mind that rabbinically the term _roshem_ connotes an act of inscripting or drawing aligned with but distinguished from writing (_ketivah_). Even more relevant is the use of _reshimah_ in kabbalistic sources—based on  the rabbinic texts—to name an amorphous form of writing, a pre-scripting  that precedes the letters that assume a more determinate shape. For example, in a passage from Moses Cordovero’s Pardes Rimmonim, the formation of  the letters involves four consecutive stages, _reshimah_, _ḥaqiqah_, _ḥaṣivah_, and  _asiyyah_. Concentrating on the first of these, _reshimah_ denotes the highest or most sublime verbal gesticulation, which is not only the marking of a trace of what has been removed but a semiotic signpost that foreshadows what is to emerge, akin to the blueprint of a building that an architect etches on a tablet  before commencing the actual construction. **To plumb the depths of the myth  of _[[5. Citations/6. Papers/Weiss, The Empty Space; Sabbateanism and its Melodies\|ṣimṣum]]_, one must attend to the amalgamation of the two connotations of _reshimah_ as trace and omen. The intermingling of these two connotations illumines the circular linearity  that is emblematic of the curvature of time: the inscription presages the reality that must be its precursor; what is left behind, therefore, is the trace of what is yet to be.** From the notion of the trace, we may adduce the elementary constituency of time as the retroactive not yet, the achronic fecundity of the future  that is the origin continually emptying itself in the coming to be of the beginning that passes away incessantly.

[[5. Citations/6. Papers/Retroactive Not Yet, Linear Circularity and Kabbalistic Temporality, Elliot R. Wolfson\|Retroactive Not Yet, Linear Circularity and Kabbalistic Temporality, Elliot R. Wolfson]]