---
{"type":"citation","author":"Walid Daqqa","key_quote":"We are a part of history, and history—as it is well known—is a condition and an action in the past. Except us: We are a past continuous and never ending. We address you all from it presently, so that it does not become your future.","translation by":"Nour Eldin Hussein","tags":["citation"],"source":"Mizna\nFuturities\nSWANA Literature + Art\nVolume 25.2, 2024","site":null,"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/5-citations/on-parallel-time/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"dg-note-properties":{"type":"citation","author":"Walid Daqqa","key_quote":"We are a part of history, and history—as it is well known—is a condition and an action in the past. Except us: We are a past continuous and never ending. We address you all from it presently, so that it does not become your future.","translation by":"Nour Eldin Hussein","tags":["citation"],"source":"Mizna\nFuturities\nSWANA Literature + Art\nVolume 25.2, 2024","site":null}}
---

On Parallel Time  

My dear brother, Abu Omar, greetings.[[9. Footnotes/Citations from Citations/1\|1]]  

Today is the twenty-fifth of March, the first day of my twentieth year imprisoned. Today is  also the twentieth birthday of a young comrade. Such an “occasion”—the anniversary of my  imprisonment, the birth of the comrade—reminds me of a question I posed to myself: how  old is Lena today, who has become a mother of two? How old is Najla, mother to three? And  Hanin, mother to a girl? And Obeida—traveling to America for his studies, bidding farewell  to his youth, yet without my bidding him farewell? And my brothers and sisters—either kids  when I left them on the day of my arrest or born after the fact—how old are my brothers and  sisters, those “children” who have since married and become mothers and fathers to kids  themselves?  

I had not asked this before. Time in the broad sense, how much of it passes—that had not  concerned me as much as the minutes do when they would fly by during those short family  visits. Too brief a time for me to lay out for them all the notes I’ve recorded on the palm of  my hand; all the missions Sanaa[[9. Footnotes/Citations from Citations/2\|2]] will need particular effort for—not just to carry them out,  but to simply remember them, as they have barred us from the use of pen or paper during  our visits, and so it is only memory that remains as the sole faculty available for  recollection. And so I forget to ponder the lines that have begun to dig in the face of my  mother for years now, and I forget to ponder her hair that she has begun to dye with henna  to hide their gray from me so that I would not inquire after her true age.  

Her true age? I do not know my mother’s “true age.” My mother has two ages: her  chronological age, which I do not know, and her prisonological age. Let’s say her age in that  parallel time is nineteen years.  

I write to you all from Parallel Time. In Parallel Time, where there is fixity of place, we do  not use the standard units of your time like minutes and hours, not unless the two lines of  our time and your time meet at the visitation window, whereupon we are forced to interact  with your chronological formulae. It is, anyway, the only thing that has not changed in your  time and that we still remember how to use.  

It has reached me on the tongue of the young delegates of the intifada—indeed, this was  told to me personally—that many things have changed in your time. The phone no longer  has a rotary dial, no longer works via coin slot but requires credit to activate; and also that  the frames of car tires do not have another inner, internal structure, but are tubeless.  

I was quite impressed by such a system! One where the tire is made of a material that closes  in on itself, plugging up any holes spontaneously and immediately, stopping any air from  leaking out of it. I’m quite impressed, as it seems to resemble the prisoner who resists the  tacks laid down by the prison guards by way of that self-contained system—the tubeless  system. Generally, there is no escape for the prisoner save for relying on such a selfcorrecting regime, as our driver or drivers cannot see a tack on the road except that they  drive over it or a bump in the road except that they trip on it, supposing that they are taking  a short cut—shortening the distance, reducing the effort. It’s not just that our drivers have  been reckless, they have simply been relying on that inner tube as if it’s not made of flesh  and blood—as if there is no end, no goal. Until we become like cash passed around on the  market, the market of political maneuvers:  

“Take this tire and permit us some of the vehicle.”  

Of what value is the tire without the vehicle?  

I do wish for the Palestinian and Arab leadership to improve. I do wish for our people and  for their political power to take up such an internal, self-reparatory system without having  to resort to those who call themselves “roadside assistance”—the Americans and their ilk  who today corrupt all the earth in Lebanon. And if it is unavoidable to speak of politics despite the fact that I have decided, today especially, not to speak of politics—then we, in  Parallel Time, see you, while you all do not see us. We hear you all while you all do not hear  us. As if glass, tinted just on your side, stands between us, like the kind for cars carrying  important people such that some of us behave arrogantly as if they are, in fact, an  important person. They have convinced us that we are important people.  

And why not! The prestige of the situation calls for it. In all the world, there are states and  governments who have prisoners except for us: We are prisoners who have a ministry in a  government that does not have a state! [[9. Footnotes/Citations from Citations/3\|3]]  

We—for those who do not know—have dwelled here in Parallel Time since before the end of  the Cold War and the collapse of the Soviet Union and the communist bloc, before the fall  of the Berlin Wall and the First and Second and Third Gulf wars, before Madrid and Oslo  and before the eruptions of the First and Second intifadas. In Parallel Time we are as old as  that revolution and we precede the genesis of some of its factions; we precede the Arabic  satellite channels and the proliferation of the culture of hamburgers in our capitals. Indeed,  we are before the invention of mobile phones and the propagation of those new  telecommunications systems and the internet. ==We are a part of history, and history—as it is  well known—is a condition and an action in the past. Except us: We are a past continuous  and never ending. We address you all from it presently, so that it does not become your  future. ==

I have said that, here, our time is not your time. Our time does not proceed on the axis of  past and present and future; our time that flows in the fixity of place ousts from our  language typical concepts of time and place—or say that it confuses them, according to your  standards. We do not ask “when?” or “where shall we meet?” for example, rather we have  already met and still meet at the same place. We proceed here flexibly to and fro on the axis  of past and present, and every moment after this present one is an unknown future that we  are no longer capable of interacting with. Of no control to us is our future—a condition quite  similar to that of all the Arab peoples, with the fundamental difference that our occupation  is foreign and their jailers Arab; here we’re imprisoned for searching for the future, and  there the future is buried alive.  

In our Parallel Time, most of us haven’t given an answer to that question posed usually to children: What do you want to be when you grow up? I, even now—even though I am fortyfour years old—have no idea what I would like to be when I grow up!  

If it is the case that time as a concept is inherent to matter—if it is its moving aspect—and if  place is the fixity of matter, then we in Parallel Time have come to represent the units of  that time. We are the time that wrestles with place and in a state of internal contradiction  with it. We have become units of time. We have come to define points on the axis of time by  the arrest of so-and-so, the arrival to the prison of such-and-such or their release from it.  Such things are important chronological events for lives in Parallel Time. We know how to  define the hour and the day and history by your units of time, but they are units that go  unused; what is used is: X happened on the day so-and-so came, or before or after suchand-such was liberated. And because we do not know when so-and-so will be arrested in  the future or when they will be moved from one prison to another, we have nothing by  which to define a future event. So, when we talk of the future, we borrow your  chronological units.  

Your time is the true time. Your time is the time of the future.  

In Parallel Time and in the controversy of the relationship between us and place, we  develop relations with objects that are strange; relationships that nobody besides those  imprisoned in Parallel Time would understand. How is it possible to understand the  emotional relationship between a prisoner and the undershirt that was the thing he was  wearing the moment before his arrest? How is it possible to explain the depth of our  relationships with predefined objects, the loss of which may lead to sorrow and even  weeping. Things like a certain lighter or a specific box of cigarettes acquire deep emotional  significance because of their distinction as the last thing we had in the “future,” as if they  affirm that we, one day, had been outside of Parallel Time—proof of our membership to  your time. Such objects are not simply consumable materials to be thrown in the trash  following their use: they are the drowning man’s last life preserver in the ocean of Parallel  Time.  

In the year 1996, I heard the honk of a Subaru for the first time in ten years and I wept. In  our time, a car horn is used for more than simply alerting passersby; in our time, a car horn  is liable to stir the deepest of human emotions.  

Through their relationship with place, the people of Parallel Time develop relationships no  stranger than those with objects. There you are suddenly, developing a special relationship  with specks on the ceiling of your cell brought about by leaking water and the humidity. Or  you might develop a relationship with a hole or crack in the door. Who would understand  that dialogue replete with fervor, with emotion, with interruption and description as if it  were a conversation on the topic of heaven and its door and not on the cell and its holes? 

The first prisoner: “There’s nothing better than department four . . . Oh, to be back in the  days of department four . . .”  

The second prisoner: “Sure, but the best thing about department four was cell seven.”  

The first prisoner—expelling all the air from his lungs in heartbreak over those days interrupts: “I know, I know, but what can you say? From this cell you can hear the precise  crack of dawn—the sound of cars on the highway.”  

The second prisoner, also interrupting: “But that’s not it—you know the cell door? Between  the cell door and the wall, right at the hinges, is an entire two centimeter-crack so wide you  can see through it while lying in bed. You can see through to the ends of the earth.” 

The first prisoner: “Man, why are you saying this? Department four is the best.”  

How simple the dreams, how great the human, how small the place, how grand the idea.  

I did not plan to write on a day like today—not about time, nor about place, nor about our  Parallel Time, nor about anything: not about politics, not about philosophy. I actually had  an inclination to write about what worries me—what I love and what I hate—but my  unplanned writing resembles my unplanned life. I will even admit that I have never  planned for anything: not to be a resistance fighter, nor a member of a political party or  faction, nor even to participate in politics—not because all that is a mistake and not because  politics is an objectionable, detestable matter as some like to see it—but because, in my  view, they are huge and complicated topics. I am not a politician nor a resistance fighter  despite previous insistence and observation. I very simply could have continued my life as a  house painter or gas station worker as I was up until the moment of my arrest. I could have  married one of my cousins early as many do, and she could have borne seven or ten kids;  and I would have bought a truck and learned the business of car dealing and the going rates  of hard currency. All of that was possible, until I saw what I saw of the atrocities during the  Lebanon War and the massacres that followed it—Sabra, Shatila. It inspired in my being  shock and astonishment.  

To stop feeling shock and astonishment, to stop feeling the misery of people (any people),  the blunting of emotion before scenes of atrocity (any atrocity), was, in my view, a daily  anxiety, and the measure of the extent of my steadfastness and solidity. To feel for people  and the pain of humanity is the very core of civilization. The intellectual core of the human  being is intention; the corporeal core is work; and the spiritual core is feeling—to feel for  people and the pain of humanity is the core of human civilization.  

It is this core especially that is targeted in the life of the prisoner every hour of every day of  every year. You are not targeted as a political subject in the first degree, neither are you  targeted as a religious subject, nor are you targeted as a consumerist subject to be punished  by deprivation from the pleasures of material life. You may adopt whatever political  conviction suits you, and you may practice whatever religious observance, and you may  even be provided with much of your material needs—but it remains that the targeted entity  of the first degree is the social, human entity within you.  

What is targeted is any relationship outside of the self, any relationship you value with  other people, with nature—even your relationship with the jailer as a human being. Truly,  they do it all to push you to hate. What is targeted is love, your sense of beauty, your sense  of humanity.  

I profess now, in my twentieth year of imprisonment, that I am still no good at the hatred,  nor the crudeness, nor the coarseness that life in prison imposes. I profess now that I still  rejoice at the barest of things with the glee of small children. I am still filled with delight at a  kind word of encouragement or compliment. I profess that my heart skips a beat at the sight  of a flower on the television, at a scene of nature, at the sea. I profess that I am joyous  despite it all, and I yearn not for any pleasure of the many pleasures of the world save for  two: the sight of children, sent off from all corners of the village to their schools; and the  sight of workers in the early hours of the morning as they proceed from the alleys of the  neighborhoods in a dusty, wintry morning, toward the town square—vital, prepared to  travel to their place of work. And I profess now that all these feelings, all this love, would  not have remained if not for the sole and solitary love of my mother, the love of Sanaa and  my brother Hosny, the support of my people and my dearest friends who surround me on  all sides—I to them, and they to me.  

I profess that I am still a human being holding onto his love as if it were a flaming torch.  And I will remain steadfast in that love—I will continue to love you all, for it is love and love  only that remains my sole victory over my jailers.  

With regards, Milad.