---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/1-surface-texts/back-from/","tags":["concept","etymology","alpha"],"dg-note-properties":{"tags":["concept","etymology","alpha"],"type":"concept","used_in":["[[TIKKUN]]"],"site":null}}
---

Re- is described by Watkins as a Latin combining form conceivably deriving from the Indo-European root *wret-* , a metathetical variant of *wert-*, “[[1. Surface Texts/to turn\|to turn]]”. 

It [[3. Concepts/On Folding\|implies]] a turning back, an undoing, a return to an [[1. Surface Texts/ie-non-native-forestry\|original]]; [[1. Surface Texts/ie-non-native-forestry-2\|repetition]] as in once more, [[3. Concepts/restoration to a former state\|restoration to a former state]]. This small wordlet has come for me to delineate the outline of a right, a natural desire, and also the point at which isms can intermingle and skew off-track along the axis of power. 

This appears to be a point upon which many [[1. Surface Texts/devils can dance\|devils can dance]], which is clarified, for my purposes, only by way of a [[1. Surface Texts/clear\|clear]] view on power differentials. Here we could see, for example, the difference between a [[1. Surface Texts/claim\|claim]], which can be stated with authority, to one's own [[1. Surface Texts/interiority\|interiority]], [[1. Surface Texts/land\|land]], and heritage, versus the use of a seemingly very similar claim utilised in the cohering of narratives in furtherance of the expanding sovereign power of transpersonal entities, such as states or corporations. So far, all I can really say is that I'm interested to move along that tart line, or just to move, with it in mind. It is a line that negotiates with discomfort, in that as it deals with narrative, it deals with the irretrievability of the unity of the past, as well as its undeniable continuity. What to do in the face of ultimate discombobulation, consumption and reconstitution, negotiation and renegotiation, rupture, friction, acceleration, flooding, vertigo, swooning, consuming, disavowing, liking, unfollowing? Perhaps these are not questions that I can answer, but only open up a little, from the perspective through which I entered into them: the question of Tikkun.

The Hebrew noun _tikkun_ (תִּקּוּן) derives etymologically from the verbal root [[1. Surface Texts/ת־ק־ן (t-q-n — to straighten that which is crooked\|ת־ק־ן (t-q-n — to straighten that which is crooked]]. This, a straightening, is often translated as redemption, restitution, or repair, implying the return to a previous state. I can straighten a candle wick or a piece of wood, but can I repair a broken vessel to its original state? Can I return what has been lost to time in its entirety; can this be restitution? I have never heard of a wound that healed to having never been; I have never become again who I was before. In this sense I may be having  a quarrel with the limitations of translation — or perhaps it is a contention with the terms I find available in thinking about injury and healing, and, in a further step, creation, throughout damaged time.

It was with the English translation of Tikkun that I continued to take issue as I considered the topic. In my [[1. Surface Texts/omnivalent\|omnivalent]] (/s) experience, nothing has ever been returned to a former state. While I work towards graduation as a painter -  constructing, applying, layering - I work as a [[1. Surface Texts/cleaner\|cleaner]]: renegotiating and subtracting the same route through the cleaned "[[3. Concepts/Jobcenter\|object]]", as my superiors call it, daily. Here I derive my method: devotional is the act of cleaning something which I, in a sense, despise; devotional is the act of not despising it. My "[[3. Concepts/Jobcenter\|object]]", and therefore the space I spend countless hours cleaning, is a hub of welfare/state bureaucracy. I don't particularly relish an ontology in which the provision of care is tied to a making-compliant, which is an imposition of friction - and yet I don't resent that a framework of stability is available to many. I am in a place that exceeds my understanding: the guts of the citizen-maker-machine, which penalises those whose exteriority it requires, and is so dingy, drab and neglected, itself! Working here I began to sense, as though nearing an intersection, the external, by whose currents this internal had come to be and was maintained. _[[1. Surface Texts/Outside\|Outside]]_ there is [[1. Surface Texts/something\|something]]: motion, the wilful abnegation of restrictions, [[1. Surface Texts/jostling forces\|jostling forces]], politics. _Inside_ is its inverse: maintenance, slowness, pretending to work; ugliness, the necessity, apparently, for that bureaucratic limbo expressed in [[1. Surface Texts/yellow and grey\|yellow and grey]] walls, low ceilings and fluorescent lights. Could this be _tikkun_? Around my circuit I gyre, and displace only the [[1. Surface Texts/smallest of things\|smallest of things]], never leaving the offices as I find them nor worse, nor really better, but only maintained and different. Here I wondered at my inability to take flight, exceed the place, muster the tension to spring forth or supercede my reservations about the art / world, or anything else. Here I wondered at my perforation with this inertia, dust and stagnation. When spring came, though, I liberated a bunch of cuttings from various office bins which now thrive on my windowsill. I also infested my home with bugs liberated from a Jobcenter pot, and culled in my beautiful home. I am perforated by dust and I perforate it. In the strange limbo place that I clean, I am close to the world. It is by way of cleaning, therefore, that I came to questions about repetition, friction, maintenance and acceleration, which remain parenthetical for most of this work.

Reconciliation… What does that mean? Retribution seems sufficient, as a word, since it is well known that there can never be a final blow when retribution runs the game. Restitution… To what state? What whole could ever be re-covered in its entirety from the dank and muggy past?

It appeared that I could find a consolation to my etymological quandary in the idea of _implication_. Re- acknowledges a turning back, but without implication. 

[[3. Concepts/implication\|Implication]]: the fact that time passed as we moved about our orbit, this orbit being a spiral form hurtling through space. [[1. Surface Texts/Hearing Residues, Seeing Residues\|Re]]-turn to what was left behind and love the accelerated flurry of intermittent change that taunts your conception of what should have been instead. 

Back, back from, back to the original place. Again, anew, once more. [[9. Footnotes/footnote Re-\|Undoing]].

Re- is described by Watkins as a Latin combining form conceivably deriving from the Indo-European root *wret- , a metathetical variant of *wert-, “[[1. Surface Texts/to turn\|to turn]]”. 

It implies a turning back, an undoing, a return to an original; repetition as in once more, [[3. Concepts/restoration to a former state\|restoration to a former state]].


