---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/1-surface-texts/jobcenter-texts/repetition/","tags":["unfinished"],"dg-note-properties":{"type":"surface","tags":["unfinished"],"site":null}}
---

[[1. Surface Texts/TIKKUN\|Dusty]] subsides. [[2. Main Theoretical Pillars/Theory Notes/wolfson-repetition-difference\|Repetition]] is the foot of all growth, that stomps and stomps the dusty path. 

Repetition is at the foot end of all growth, and lies curled spindled at its feet, and glares up adoring-like, hungry, [[1. Surface Texts/On Loafing About\|hungry]]. 

Each fleck of dust is strung to another. Each fleck of dust will find its rightful place in [[1. Surface Texts/sticky\|history]]. Each fleck of dust will be a kiss on Dusty's lip, and no snowflake will land there. [[1. Surface Texts/sticky\|Remembering]] is a terrible plight on Dusty, who cries and cries for joy. Dusty sews each fleck of dust to another, so that none may be forgotten. Dusty is as big as the sky, and when she looks up at night she has no use for stars. Dusty prays a song that freezes at night. Dusty cares to tend to [[1. Surface Texts/Jobcenter Texts/Friction\|friction]]. Rupture is [[1. Surface Texts/Jobcenter Texts/Friction\|friction]] between [[1. Surface Texts/Jobcenter Texts/Power\|power]] and me. Smooth, smooth through the rent night. At the foot of the foot that steps through, Dusty tends to the disrespected floor. A disrespected floor may be loved roughly for years before shone by Dusty's rag, where she will catch her own [[3. Concepts/On Folding\|reflection]]. Continuity is the passage in socks over polished floors. Who polished them? Dusty. Don't worry that your floor's a mess. This is in the nature of floors. But now, who stepped over the floor with his boots full of nails?