---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/2-main-theoretical-pillars/theory-notes/citations-from-ch-4-mystical-madness/","tags":["unfinished","Mark","Nahman","paper"],"dg-note-properties":{"type":"citation","tags":["unfinished","Mark","Nahman","paper"],"site":null}}
---

[[2. Main Theoretical Pillars/Theory Notes/Silence, Song and Screaming\|Silence, Song and Screaming]]
[[2. Main Theoretical Pillars/Theory Notes/Implication of the Scream\|Implication of the Scream]]

>Thought is a level that exceeds speech; not an image that merely expresses a negative vacuum, it is rather a metaphor for a phase that precedes and transcends speech, and for this reason is beyond human comprehension. Humans, including Moses, cannot ‘answer’ a place in which there is no speech with speech – only with silence. (Chapter 4, p. 160)

> "The belief required in confronting the void has two components: silence and melody. Silence is the relinquishing of the intellect, and parallels the 'casting off of the intellect.' ... Just, however, as the labor of casting off the intellect is merely an interim stage towards mystical perception, here, too, silence from speech and the casting off of the wisdoms constitute the stage of renouncing the perception of intellect and language, a stage at which the zaddik is to construct the melody and the song." (Chapter 4, pp. 164-165)

> "The highest phase in this belief is characterized by melody and song, and not by silence. The silence is only partial, and consists of the silence of casting off the intellect, but even within this silence man sings." (Chapter 4, p. 165)

> "Silence is the relinquishing of the intellect, and parallels the 'casting off of the intellect.' This topic is brought into clearer focus and is confirmed by the wording of a manuscript by R. Nachman: 'For this reason, we are called Hebrews, for we cast off all wisdoms and adhere solely to the Lord, may He be blessed, by belief alone.' Just, however, as the labor of casting off the intellect is merely an interim stage towards mystical perception, here, too, silence from speech and the casting off of the wisdoms constitute the stage of renouncing the perception of intellect and language, a stage at which the zaddik is to construct the melody and the song." (Chapter 4, pp. 164-165)

> "And know that by the melody of the zaddik, who is of the aspect of Moses, he elevates the souls from this heresy of the void into which they descended." (Chapter 4, p. 162, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* I:64:4)

> "Melody is the instrument and sole means by which the zaddik can act to elevate the souls that have descended into the heresies of the void." (Chapter 4, p. 162)

> "Only the zaddik, such as Moses, who has knowledge of silence, similarly knows the melody. Melody, parallel to silence, is the correct response in the face of a reality that lacks language and speech. R. Nachman stresses that the same zaddik, assigned the task of engaging the heresies coming from the void, also knows not only silence but also the secret of the melody." (Chapter 4, p. 162)

> "A profound understanding of his silence teaches, however, that the zaddik is not at all silent; rather, his mouth is full of songs and melodies. Being of the aspect of silence and defective of speech is limited to the realm of speech, and ensues from the fact that the utterances of this world are not whole, since they do not express the praise of the Lord." (Chapter 4, p. 166)

> "Despite the central role the subject of the melody plays in the confrontation with the void, it is absent from the studies of Weiss, Green and Magid, who discuss Teaching 64 and the void extensively. Weiss, who extensively examined the meaning of silence and its different strata, completely ignores the topic of the melody, even though he writes at length in different places about Teaching 64 and the void." (Chapter 4, p. 167)

> "The melody and its significance apparently could not be incorporated in the interpretation given by Weiss and Green to the subject of silence and the void... Only the repression of the melody enabled them to construct a complete interpretation for the Bratslav belief, depicted as the polar opposite of, or different from, the mystical world. Weiss and Green do not view the complete context of Bratslav faith and the silence of the zaddik correctly." (Chapter 4, pp. 167-168)

> "This is not the belief of silence and muteness facing the void, nor should we overstate the chilling and tormented colors of this silence. This silence, coming from the wise utterances, enables the melody of belief, the all-inclusive and highest melody, to ascend and be heard. Not only the still and tortured, small voice, but also the sounds of song and melody burst forth from the world of Bratslav belief." (Chapter 4, p. 166)

> "R. Nachman's emphasis considerably mitigates the meaning of God's absence from the void. He focuses the emptiness of the void to emptiness from 'mind,' language and speech, thereby opening a window to another kind of presence of God. This is implied later in the teaching, when R. Nachman argues that the void is the realm of 'the highest thought, that which is beyond language,' that is to say: there is no speech in the void, but thought does exist there." (Chapter 4, pp. 159-160)

> "The ability to hear the melody and the song is the ability to come in contact with the nonverbal plane of the spirituality and sanctity inherent in the world. Song and melody express the festive and spiritual strata of the reality not manifest in prose and defying verbal formulation. Man is mandated to hear the singing and the melody of the herbs and to know to play melody, that is, to know to raise and give voice to those melodies that he hears. The melody comprises the exposure and ascent of the good spirit, the divinely inspired spirit, and is a necessary level and step in the acceptance of the prophetic spirit. By expressing the melodies of joy, a person can attain belief, devekut (adherence to God), the spirit of divine inspiration, and prophecy." (Chapter 4, pp. 163-164)

> "And at times the mochin and the divine life-force are hidden, in the aspect of 'fetal existence.' And then 'it is good for a person to cry out,' whether in prayer or in Torah, when his mochin are concealed, for that concealment – i.e., that 'fetal existence' – is in the aspect of 'the Rock who has borne you, you have forgotten' ... And with a person's outcry in his prayer and in his Torah, when his mochin are absent, he is in the aspect of 'fetal existence' – those outcries are the aspect of the outcry of the woman giving birth ... And the revelation is the aspect of 'birth.'" (Chapter 6, p. 210, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* I 21:7)

> "The service of hitbodedut in the Bratslavian sense is similar to 'casting away one's intellect;' it is not the service of God with one's rational mind... Even though supplicatory speech between a person and his maker originates in troubles and sufferings, it strengthens the feeling that enables him to come to be enveloped by God, like a son pleading before his father. Praying about the hardship and difficulty of existence can bring a person to a state of suffering, crying out, and vigorous weeping; this in turn can lead to a person being ecstatically carried away in pain and suffering, dissociating from himself and from his rational mind; from here a pathway opens for him to a state of consciousness of self-nullification and complete absorption into God." (Chapter 3, pp. 135-136)

> "From a phenomenological standpoint, the two previous models of contact with holiness stand at polar opposites. Whereas one describes an intensive conscious activity that demands that a person 'intensify and increase his thought in this' in order to understand the specific message directed to a person in every created thing, the second can occur automatically, entirely lacking personal awareness. From this standpoint, the third model mediates between its two predecessors. It does not describe an activity that demands profundity of thought or expansion of intellect, but rather the development of awareness that does not occur spontaneously, but is the fruit of activity and a clear, internal preparation. Melody is such an intermediate state." (Chapter 3, pp. 95-96)

> "Melody grants a person vitality and power, even though it does not tell him anything specific. There is no transference of content here, but transference of vitality. Melody is the spirit that gives life to the words in the sense that it is a spark of holiness from which words draw their vitality." (Chapter 3, p. 98)

> "R. Nachman said: It is good for a person to accustom himself to revive himself with a melody, for melody is a very great and exalted matter, and has great power to arouse and draw the heart of a person to Hashem, be He blessed. And even if a person cannot sing, nevertheless at home by himself he can revive himself with a melody to the degree that he can sing it, for the quality of melody cannot be imagined." (Chapter 3, p. 98, quoting *Sichot Moharan* 273)

> "But to attain this, to be absorbed into one's root – i.e., to return to God and to be absorbed into the oneness of Hashem, be He blessed, who is the Necessary Existent – can only be achieved via self-nullification, when a person nullifies himself entirely, until he is absorbed into God's oneness, be He blessed. And it is only possible to come to that self-nullification via hitbodedut... Know that the essence of self-nullification, when a person nullifies his being and becomes nothing and is absorbed into the oneness of Hashem, be He blessed, comes only through hitbodedut." (Chapter 3, pp. 131-132, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* I 52)

> "During the night, which is the time for the depositing of spirits, the aspect of 'in Your hand will I entrust my spirit,' that is the time to extract the good spirit from the midst of the evil spirit – i.e., for that is the principal time for hitbodedut, for a person to engage in hitbodedut by isolating himself with his Maker and expressing his speech before Hashem, be He blessed, speaking with his heart and seeking the good spirit – i.e., the good points that are still within him, in order to extract them from the evil spirit. This is the aspect of melody." (Chapter 3, pp. 129-130, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* I 54)

> "We see, therefore, that when R. Nachman describes the service of melody as a service of the night, he presents it as existing particularly when a person is in those states of consciousness characterized by the absence of the rational mind, states in which a person's actions and attainments are characterized by faith. Melody, together with the other components of nocturnal service – hitbodedut, prayer/speech with one's Maker and raising the good spirit – are all in the aspect of 'and your faithfulness in the nights.'" (Chapter 3, p. 131)

> "R. Nachman said that the essence of completely realized hitbodedut and speech between a person and his maker is that a person expresses his speech so much before Hashem, blessed be He, that he comes very close to having his soul leave, heaven forbid, so that he almost dies, heaven forbid, coming to the point that his soul is connected to his body by no more than a hair, due to the power of his genuine suffering and his yearning and longing for Hashem, be He blessed." (Chapter 3, p. 141, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* II 99)

> "R. Nachman's doctrine of melody takes the words of the Baal Shem Tov a step further. R. Nachman clearly and unmistakably calls on people to go out to the fields to hear its song. This Chapter of Song is completely disconnected from the text of the Chapter of Song that the kabbalists recited daily. The Bratslavian Chapter of Song summons a man to close his books, including the Chapter of Song, to go outdoors to the fields and hear the song of the grasses. This edict that a person connect his own song to the song of created beings... is a summons to man to physically join the choir of song and melody, to stand amidst the grasses and trees, and from their song, and together with their song, pray and pour forth his own melody." (Chapter 3, p. 114)

> "For R. Nachman, magic and mysticism are not opposites that can coexist, despite the contradiction and tensions between them. Rather, they are two perspectives on the same world. The magical influence on grasses is profoundly linked to the mystical experience of hearing the holy melody; moreover, hearing the song is itself a 'magical act,' just as it is a 'mystical act.'" (Chapter 3, p. 122)

> "R. Nachman said that the fact that he is not able to teach Torah at times is something particularly novel – 'that I have already developed and prepared a number of great new insights, but in the midst of that I forget everything and I do not remember anything, and I do not know anything at all, of any book in the world, and I do not even know any melody. Instead, everything, indeed everything, is forgotten and hidden from me. And that is truly a great wonder.'" (Chapter 6, p. 196)

> "R. Nachman's directive not to attempt to return to one's place from before the fall and not to attempt to improve and perfect one's previous level, but rather 'every day to begin anew' is to be understood in accordance with the axiom that the descent is 'the beginning of coming close to God' and an essential stage in coming close to God in that it is a 'second fetal existence' that make rebirth possible. In this sense, a person's spiritual stature is not built consecutively, brick by brick; rather, every day a person falls to 'smallness' and begins his way from nothingness. Every day, a person is in the aspect of the 'dead' and is born anew." (Chapter 6, pp. 207-208)

> "And R. Nachman would regularly begin every time anew – i.e., when he fell from his level on occasion, he did not give up on himself because of that but said that he would begin anew, as though he had not yet begun at all to enter into the service of God, be He blessed, and that only now was he beginning anew. And so every single time he would always regularly begin anew. And at times even within one day, he would fall from his service of God and he would begin anew, and so a number of times in that one day." (Chapter 6, p. 208, quoting *Shivchei Haran*)

> "And at times the mochin and the divine life-force are hidden, in the aspect of 'fetal existence.' And then 'it is good for a person to cry out,' whether in prayer or in Torah, when his mochin are concealed, for that concealment – i.e., that 'fetal existence' – is in the aspect of 'the Rock who has borne you, you have forgotten' ... And with a person's outcry in his prayer and in his Torah, when his mochin are absent, he is in the aspect of 'fetal existence' – those outcries are the aspect of the outcry of the woman giving birth... And the revelation is the aspect of 'birth.'" (Chapter 6, p. 210, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* I 21:7)

> "For via a person's sufferings, he comes to the aspect of self-nullification... And afterwards, even though he has returned from that self-nullification, nevertheless, by means of the residue that remains of that nullification, a renewal of the Torah is brought about. This is because by means of that self-nullification, in which he had been nullified to the ultimate, and realized that all of his sufferings are very great favors, as a result of that he was filled with joy." (Chapter 3, p. 136, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* I 65:4)

> "Only the view of performing mitzvot as mad acts of love transforms them into something forgivable – 'love conceals all iniquities.' Acts and games of love have no intrinsic value and, if judged in isolation from the love that impels them, appear as embarrassing acts of madness, without rhyme or reason. So too the value of a religious deed derives from the fact that it is the fruit of love; without desire and yearning it is simple foolishness." (Chapter 8, pp. 267-268)

> "Only the awareness 'that the essential thing is the desire to yearn always with a strong longing and will' can permit the service of God – not as something genuine and not literally as the thing itself – rather, 'we learn as though we are learning and pray as though we are praying and perform mitzvot as though we are performing mitzvot.' The service of God flows from a yearning and longing for the thing itself, which cannot be reached, so that a person is left only with taking delight in an imitation of and in a performance depicting that object yearned for unto death, yet which is so untenable as to be absurd." (Chapter 8, pp. 276-277)

> "Religious service is not based upon intellect and da'at; moreover, its entire basis and permissibility are based on a person's readiness to cast away his intellect and renounce his da'at. In this sense, keeping the Torah and performing the mitzvot is madness, for it demands of a person the constant readiness to act foolishly, like a clown, and 'to act and do things that appear as mad for the sake of the service of Hashem.' This madness is a part of the sickness of love, 'in the aspect of "in her love you go mad constantly;" for the sake of the love of Hashem, it is necessary to do things that appear as madness.' And it is only the understanding that these are 'the mad elements of love,' that give the Torah and mitzvot not their logical sense, but rather their significance, meaning and supernal value." (Chapter 8, pp. 277-278, quoting *Likkutei Moharan* II 5)