---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/2-main-theoretical-pillars/theory-notes/nahman-and-the-empty-space/","tags":["Nahman","Magid","tsimtsum","theory","unfinished"],"dg-note-properties":{"type":"theory","tags":["Nahman","Magid","tsimtsum","theory","unfinished"],"site":null}}
---

For Nahman, the void left after the retraction of Ein Sof provides a fertile ground for the enactment of redemption[^1]. Hasidic doctrine did not generally conceive of creation and the world within the continuation of tsimtsum; instead, tsimtsum had been a condition of creation which had been overcome. According to Magid, Nahman is the only Hasidic thinker to propose a “tarrying” within tsimtsum. 

_There is [thus] a […] type of heresy, made up of wisdom, which is really no wisdom at all. The perplexities and questions of this heresy come from the void (halal). They have about them the quality of silence, because no intellect nor language can resolve them. Creation came about through the word. . . . In language there is intellect. . . language defines all things. . . . But in the void which surrounds all worlds and is completely empty, there is no language.19. . . Therefore the questions which arise, they are silent.20_

[^1]: For the most part, classical scholarship on the ideological foundations of hasidism has worked under the assumption that hasidism is preoccupied with the notion of divine immanence.8 The Besht's emphasis on God as the "filler of worlds" has been viewed as the signpost for hasidic ideology. In both its mystical formulations and its more faith-oriented presentation, hasidism has often been viewed as a religious ideology founded on uncovering the presence of God in the world. This uncovering is seen as a personal and collective process of redemption. The notion of revealing the divinity hidden in the recesses of nature, however, presupposes the omnipresence of God in the world; God's hiddenness is therefore epistemological rather than ontological. [...] While the notion of zimzum introduces the possibility of divine absence as only a temporary phase in the dynamic process of creation, R. Nahman focused his attention on this part of the process rather than on its culmination, when the absence is infused with a renewed state of divinity.  [...] Within the timelessness of creation, this surely must be an acceptable approach. Nevertheless, The notion that the void remains after creation is, as far as I know, R. Nahman's alone. P. 499, Magid, Through the Void


"What interested him was that the void may serve as a foundation for the emotional response to the perception of divine absence in human experience." (Magid, 500)